Project Gutenberg's Los Desastres de la guerra:, by Francisco de Goya

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Los Desastres de la guerra:
       colección de ochenta láminas inventadas y grabadas al agua fuerte

Author: Francisco de Goya

Release Date: August 18, 2019 [EBook #60117]

Language: Spanish

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOS DESASTRES DE LA GUERRA: ***




Produced by Chuck Greif (This file was produced from images
available at The Internet Archive)









                      LOS DESASTRES DE LA GUERRA:


   Collecion de ochenta láminas inventadas y grabadas al agua fuerte

                                  POR

                          DON FRANCISCO GOYA.


      Publícala la Rˡ. Academia de Nobles Artes de San Fernando.

                                MADRID.

                                 1863.


El nombre de Goya es bien conocido de todos los amantes de las Artes, y
ha volado por España y fuera de ella acompañado de una fama merecida: á
pesar de la poca justicia con que generalmente son juzgados los hombres
de mérito verdadero por sus contemporáneos, la generación que concluye,
que le conoció y trató en su vigor, la que hoy média su camino, que le
alcanzó en sus últimos años, y la que comienza su carrera artística y ha
visto sus obras y oido hablar do él á sus padres y á sus maestros, todas
unánimes le conceden un honroso lugar en la série larga y brillante de
los artistas españoles. Y no debe Goya su nombre y su fama á la
circunstancia de haber escaseado tanto los artistas notables en España
durante el último tercio del siglo pasado y el primero del presente, no:
Goya hubiera conquistado siempre y en cualesquiera circunstancias el
renombre que no podia menos de adquirirle su originalidad verdadera,
hija de la singular independencia de su carácter: maestro de sí mismo,
puede decirse que por sí solo constituyó Escuela, adoptando un modo de
ver en artes que nadie tuvo antes que él, que acaso nadie seguirá
despues. No se propone la Academia hacer una crítica del génio y de las
obras de este hombre singular, que ha sido ya juzgado con algún acierto
por propios y estraños; y al publicar una coleccion, hasta ahora
inédita, de sus estimadas aguas-fuertes, cumple solo un honroso deber,
contribuyendo á dar á conocer cada vez, mas las obras características de
tan distinguido maestro, y tan digno individuo de este cuerpo artístico.
La coleccion que él designó con el nombre de _Estragos ó Desastres de la
Guerra_, es sin disputa una de las más notables que en este género
produjo Goya: en ella se descubre todo el brío de su fogosa imaginación,
exaltada y sobreescilada por un vivo sentimiento de patriotismo, en
aquellos terribles momentos en que una injusta invasión estranjera
pretendía humillar el orgullo y altivez característicos del nombre
castellano: ¿qué mucho, pues, que un español, un aragonés y un hombre
del carácter duro é independiente de Goya se dejase arrastrar muchas
veces hasta la exageracion y la caricatura? En cambio respira esta obra
novedad en los asuntos, originalidad en los tipos, fuego en la
composicion, valentía y seguridad en la mancha, decision y hasta finura
en el dibujo. Para que nada falte á esta singular coleccion, las
leyendas puestas á cada lámina son otro rasgo mas del génio de su autor:
concisas, incisivas y picantes añaden carácter, si añadírselo es posible
á lo que ya consignó el lápiz del artista: una breve frase, y á veces
una palabra sola, revelan con su misma rapidez la idea fugaz que su
mente concibiera en un momento y su mano representara en poco más de
otro. La Academia, que ha adquirido las planchas de esta coleccion,
conocida de muy pocos y de la que solo se habian sacado un número
reducido de pruebas, la publica con la confianza de que ha de merecer
una favorable acogida á los amantes de las Artes españolas.

Varias son las biografías que se han escrito y publicado del célebre
Goya, cuya vida y cuyo retrato son ya bastante conocidos; por eso la
Academia no cree necesario poner al frente de esta publicacion sino una
brevísima noticia de su vida y obras, para conocimiento de aquellos
pocos que antes de examinarla, no hayan leído ninguna de aquellas.

D. Francisco Goya y Lucientes nació en Fuentedetodos, Aragón, el dia 31
de Marzo de 1746: no se tienen noticias detalladas de su juventud, y
solo se sabe que desde la edad de 13 años se dedicó al dibujo en
Zaragoza bajo la dirección de D. José Luzan, y que, muy jóven aún, pasó
á Roma donde continuó sus estudios. Las primeras obras que dieron á
conocer su génio en la pintura fueron los cuadros que ejecutó para la
fábrica de tapices, cuyo valor autorizaba con su visto bueno el
caballero Mengs, á quien tenia asombrado la grande facilidad con que los
hacia. Pintó al fresco una de las medias naranjas de la Iglesia del
Pilar de Zaragoza y en Madrid la capilla de San Antonio de la Florida.
Tuvo bastante facilidad en los retratos, y los mejores fueron los de
aquellos amigos en que no empleó mas que una sesión. El Cristo y cuadro
del Santo en la Iglesia de San Francisco, y el de San José de Calasanz
en la de San Antonio Abad de Madrid, los tres que hizo para la capilla
del Monte Torrero en Zaragoza, el prendimiento que existe en la
sacristía de la Catedral de Toledo, y Santa Justa y Rufina en la de
Sevilla, bastan para dar á conocer su mérito artístico; aunque siempre
merecieron su predileccion los cuadros que tenia en su casa, pues, como
pintados con libertad según su génio y para su uso particular, los hizo
con el cuchillo de la paleta en lugar del pincel, logrando sin embargo
que causen un efecto admirable á proporcionada distancia. Pintó muchos
cuadros en que representó con admirable verdad las costumbres del pueblo
bajo de Madrid, y otros muchos asuntos variados y caprichosos. Son muy
notables y dignas de verse entre sus obras de estos géneros la coleccion
de cuadros que posee el Excmo. Sr. Duque de Osuna en su bella quinta de
la Alameda, que representan varias escenas populares en figuras de
tamaño mayor y mas concluidas que lo que generalmente acostumbraba, los
retratos que en considerable número tienen el mismo Sr. Duque y el de
Fernan-Nuñez, y la de pinturas al temple que ejecutó sobre los muros de
la casa que habitó en las afueras de Madrid, situada en una altura,
cerca del camino de la ermita de San Isidro y que hoy pertenece al Sr.
D. Segundo Colmenares: los asuntos de estas pinturas son muy variados;
conciliábulos de brujas, riñas, escenas de costumbres y algún asunto
mitológico. La Academia posee cuatro cuadros compañeros que representan
un auto de fé, una procesiosn de Semana santa, una corrida de toros en
una aldea, y una casa de locos; posee además otro que representa la
mascarada del entierro de la sardina, de figuras pequeñas como los otros
cuatro; otros dos que representan en tamaño natural el uno una mujer
tendida y caprichosamente vestida de maja, y el otro otra que pasa por
retrato de la actriz conocida por la Tirana, y el retrato del mismo
Goya. Las dos anteriores se van á grabar para formar parle de la
coleccion de grabados de sus cuadros notables que la Academia se propone
publicar.

Grabó al agua fuerte además de la coleccion que hoy se publica otras
tres que compondrán mas de doscientos cobres y pasó los últimos años de
su vida dibujando constantemente.

Fué nombrado individuo de esta Academia en 7 de Mayo de 1780, Director
de Pintura en 15 de Setiembre de 1795, quedando como honorario dos años
despues. Fué pintor de cámara del Rey Cárlos IV desde Abril de 1789 y el
primero de los de esta clase en Octubre de 1799. Falleció en Burdeos á
los 84 años de edad el 16 de Abril de 1828.


[Imagen: Tristes presentimientos de lo que ha de acontecer.]

[Imagen: Con razon ó sin ella.]

[Imagen: Lo mismo.]

[Imagen: Las mugeres dan valor.]

[Imagen: Y son fieras.]

[Imagen: Bien te se está.]

[Imagen: Que valor!]

[Imagen: Siempre sucede.]

[Imagen: No quieren.]

[Imagen: Tampoco.]

[Imagen: Ni por esas.]

[Imagen: Para eso habeis nacido.]

[Imagen: Amarga presencia.]

[Imagen: Duro es el paso!]

[Imagen: Y no hai remedio.]

[Imagen: Se aprovechan.]

[Imagen: No se convienen.]

[Imagen: Enterrar y callar.]

[Imagen: Ya no hay tiempo.]

[Imagen: Curarlos, y á otra.]

[Imagen: Será lo mismo.]

[Imagen: Tanto y mas.]

[Imagen: Lo mismo en otras partes.]

[Imagen: Aun podrán servir.]

[Imagen: Tambien estos.]

[Imagen: No se puede mirar.]

[Imagen: Caridad.]

[Imagen: Populacho.]

[Imagen: Lo merecia.]

[Imagen: Estragos de la guerra.]

[Imagen: Fuerte cosa es!]

[Imagen: Por qué?]

[Imagen: Qué hai que hacer mas?]

[Imagen: Por una navaja.]

[Imagen: No se puede saber por qué.]

[Imagen: Tampoco.]

[Imagen: Esto es peor.]

[Imagen: Bárbaros!]

[Imagen: Grande hazaña!] Con muertos!

[Imagen: Algun partido saca.]

[Imagen: Escapan entre las llamas.]

[Imagen: Todo va revuelto.]

[Imagen: Tambien esto.]

[Imagen: Yo lo vi.]

[Imagen: Y esto tambien.]

[Imagen: Esto es malo.]

[Imagen: Así sucedió.]

[Imagen: Cruel lástima!]

[Imagen: Caridad de una muger.]

[Imagen: Madre infeliz!]

[Imagen: Gracias á la almorta.]

[Imagen: No llegan á tiempo.]

[Imagen: Espiró sin remedio.]

[Imagen: Clamores en vano.]

[Imagen: Lo peor es pedir.]

[Imagen: Al cementerio.]

[Imagen: Sanos y enfermos.]

[Imagen: No hay que dar voces.]

[Imagen: De qué sirve una taza?]

[Imagen: No hay quien los socorra.]

[Imagen: Si son de otro linage.]

[Imagen: Las camas de la muerte.]

[Imagen: Muertos recogidos.]

[Imagen: Carretadas al cementerio.]

[Imagen: Qué alboroto es este?]

[Imagen: Extraña devocion!]

[Imagen: Esta no lo es menos.]

[Imagen: Que locura!]

[Imagen: Nada.] Ello dirá.

[Imagen: No saben el camino.]

[Imagen: Contra el bien general.]

[Imagen: Las resultas.]

[Imagen: Gatesca pantomima.]

[Imagen: Esto es lo peor!]

[Imagen: Farándula de charlatanes.]

[Imagen: El buitre carnívoro.]

[Imagen: Que se rompe la cuerda.]

[Imagen: Se defiende bien.]

[Imagen: Murió la Verdad.]

[Imagen: Se resucitará?]








End of Project Gutenberg's Los Desastres de la guerra:, by Francisco de Goya

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOS DESASTRES DE LA GUERRA: ***

***** This file should be named 60117-0.txt or 60117-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/1/1/60117/

Produced by Chuck Greif (This file was produced from images
available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
